The final year project requires you to perform an extensive piece of individual work on a specific topic demonstrably related to your award, under the supervision of a member of staff. The project has several aims:
it enables you to pursue your studies in a relevant area which interests you, so that you considerably enhance your expertise about your chosen project area;
it provides a showcase in which you can demonstrate your ability to use and integrate significant areas of the knowledge, intellectual skills and practical abilities that you have acquired during your course and develop them further;
finally, although you will have a supervisor to turn to for advice and guidance, the success of your project depends on your ability to plan and carry out work independently, over a lengthy period. The project aims to foster this capacity for responsible, self-directed work of high quality, which is one of the qualities of an honours graduate.

The ‘product’ element is assessed on what you actually produce, e.g. software, a design, or a report. A further element of the project assesses the processes of planning and researching your project, your own view of how it turns out and how you handled the work involved.

It is a requirement of the project that it should build on the modules you have already studied, or are studying, in other parts of your course. You will be required to state which modules have a bearing on your proposed project and indicate in what ways they are relevant to the particular project you have chosen. You should include this in your Planning and Research Report and in the introductory section of the Report to the Examiners, where typically you will outline the project and why you chose it.


All submitted documentation must make it clear whenever any portion of the work is attributable to someone other than yourself. This also covers such things as the use of proprietary software, methods and tools; material from code libraries; or the use of assets such as audio files, images and graphics, which have been created by a third party.

THE PROJECT MUST
clear identification of the problem
a clear statement of the project’s aims and objectives
background research and contextual investigation as needed
awareness of the relevant social, legal, ethical and professional implications
identification of the relevant stages of the life cycle undertaken
the use of development tools and testing wherever appropriate
evaluation of proposed or actual solutions against feasible alternatives
critical appraisal covering both product and process.


(The Report to the Examiners/Process report)
as it is where you discuss the process by which you carried out your project.Which is a very important aspect of what is being examined..
In it you should critically evaluate every significant area of your project work, including your choice of project.
How it fits in with the modules you have studied;
Your background research and the way it has influenced your project;
Your methodology and planning;
The progress you made, problems encountered,
their solutions and the lessons learned;
aspects of your work you are particularly proud of;
further areas for possible investigations or enhancements;
and, finally, an assessment of the success or failure of the project as a whole.

THE PROJECT MUST'S
In this report you will want to include your original project plan, together with any later versions or a discussion of any necessary changes to the plan.

This report exceeds 5000 words
This report is an assessable component of the project and is one the examiners will pay close attention to. Please hand in two copies.
All reports MUST contain a first page with student name, student number, exit award for which you are registered and a short title.


In line with the professional approach required of project work documents of any significant length should have:
-a table of contents,
-a structured format and be properly paginated.
-The documentation submitted should be in a format agreed with your supervisor and should normally be in A4 format.
We ask you to present all documents in uniform binding with your name, course and the project title on all covers and,
-where possible, on the spine as well.
-All disks should be properly labelled, enclosed in suitable wallets or sleeves, and be accompanied by suitable instructions for their use. It is important that you check that your examiners will be able to read or run any disks on their machines before you submit them.



It is therefore important that you can demonstrate an awareness of and engagement with the social, legal, ethical and professional issues that are relevant to your project. Use of software libraries, requirements investigation etc. Your examiners will be looking for a critical appreciation of the issues raised by your project, which you should discuss in the Report to the Examiners. 
T
here are some particular things that you need to take note of:
Intellectual property: The following is a statement explaining the right the University claims over student work, including projects:
The university requires access to intellectual property generated by students. As a condition of joining the university, students grant the university the right to use their work for academic purposes, including assessment and research, and for purposes relating to the administration of the university, including quality assurance and publicity. It is particularly important that the above be brought to the attention of any third party supporting your project.

It should also be noted that materials included in your project originating from the Internet are subject to the same proprietary rights as those originating from any other source (typically paper based sources). Copyright material must not be used in a project if there is any intention to use that material for commercial purposes following the completion of the project without obtaining explicit permission from the owner. We advise that copyright material should not be used without obtaining permission from the owner in writing.

Research ethics: all research involving human subjects needs to be governed by ethical good practice

Plagiarism: It has always been possible to copy information from other sources into your work and pass it off as your own. However, with the rapid expansion of the internet and other digital media, this process has become much easier. Whenever cases of plagiarism have been discovered, in any module, there have been serious implications for the student resulting, as a minimum punishment, in the failure of the module. If this occurs on this module it will inevitably lead to a failure to achieve an honours degree.
The project raises some specific issues of plagiarism as it is more than a written piece of work. If you use any assets that you have not created yourself, such as sound recordings, images or modules of code from software libraries, they can only be used with the owners’ permission. Authorship should be clearly and correctly credited, as should the origins of any open source software that you may use. The use of any content from public web sites in a software application, without permission or crediting, constitutes plagiarism – exactly as with written work.

In the written deliverables of the project, such as the Planning and Research Report or the Report to the Examiners, the normal rules on plagiarism apply. Small pieces of the work of others may be used and quoted; in all cases they must be correctly acknowledged and cited, according to standard academic practice. Resources to help with referencing and citation can be found on the CI301 space on studentcentral. 





Grade A  >70%
Technical grasp - Excellent technical insight demonstrated to a professional level
Understanding of problem area - Showed professional level of insight into the whole area in which the project is embedded
Project management - Completely successful and entirely self-managed
Report quality - Excellent – clear, substantial, fluent, correctly organised, convincing and with no omissions
Evidence of learning - Mature reflection on the whole process, showing professional level of insight
Research effort - Competent and thorough coverage of the field with excellent research in many areas. Research clearly influenced outcomes

B 60-70%
Technical grasp - Good technical insight in nearly all areas
Understanding of problem area - Showed a wide understanding of  the problem area – few questionable aspects
Project management - Good planning, self-motivation and control of activities
Report quality - Clear, thorough and convincing in almost all respects
Evidence of learning - Convincing evidence of learning across several different aspects of project activity
Research effort - Competent and thorough coverage of the field, with excellent research in some areas. Research clearly influenced outcomes

